---
layout:     post
tags:       blog
title:      "Devtools deep dive: inspect HTML, JavaScript console, and more!"
date:       2024-09-01
summary:    "Overview of the fixes to the devtools support during the Outreachy internship"
categories:
---

TODO: LINKS

Servo has been working on improving the [Firefox devtools](https://firefox-source-docs.mozilla.org/devtools-user) support as part of the [Outreachy](https://www.outreachy.org) internship program since June, and we're thrilled to share significant progress.

Devtools are a set of **web developer tools inside Firefox** that allows for examining, edit and debug HTML, CSS and JavaScript. Servo leverages existing work there and uses the open protocol to inspect its own websites.

IMAGE: DOM Inspector

While relying on a third party API allows us to offer this functionality without building it from scratch, it doesn't come without downsides. Back in June of last year, with the release of Firefox 110, changes to the protocol **broke our previous implementation**. The core issue was that the message structure sent between Servo and Firefox for the devtools functionality had changed.

To address this, we first updated an existing patch to fix the connection and list the webviews running in Servo (@fabricedesre, @eerii, @mrobinson, #32475). We also had to update the structure of some [actors](https://firefox-source-docs.mozilla.org/devtools/backend/actor-hierarchy.html) (pieces of code that respond to messages sent by Firefox with relevant information), since it changed significantly (@eerii, #32509).

One of the main challenges was figuring out the messages we needed to send back to Firefox. The [source code](https://searchfox.org/mozilla-central/source/devtools/server/actors) for their devtools implementation is very well commented and proved to be invaluable. However, it was also helpful to see the actual messages being sent. While Servo can show the ones it sends and receives, **debugging another instance of Firefox** to observe its messages was very useful. To facilitate this, we made a helper script (@eerii, #32684) using [Wireshark](https://www.wireshark.org) to inspect the connection between the devtools client and server, allowing us to view the contents of each packet and search through them.

**Support for the console** was fixed, enabling the execution of JavaScript code directly on Servo's webviews and the display of any warning that the page emits (@eerii, @mrobinson, #32727).

IMAGE: JavaScript console

Finally, the most significant changes involved the **DOM inspector**. Here tighter integration with Servo's script module was required to retrieve the properties of each element. Viewing CSS styles was particularly challenging, since they can come from many places (the `style` attribute, a stylesheet, an ancestor, ...), but @emilio had great insight into where to look. As a result, now it is possible to view the HTML tree, and add, remove or modify any attribute or CSS property (@eerii, @mrobinson, #32655, #32884, #32888, #33025).

These changes have already landed, and you can enable them with the `--devtools` flag in servoshell. For a step-by-step guide on how to use the devtools inspector, check the [Servo book](https://book.servo.org/hacking/using-devtools.html). We'd love to hear your feedback on how these work and what additional features you'd find helpful in your workflow.

There is still work to be done. Currently, only the console and inspector are supported, but other valuable features like the network analyzer or the storage tab are still not functional. Moreover, some pieces of the DOM inspector are still barebones. As an example, now that flexbox is enabled by default (@mrobinson, #33186) it would be a good idea to support it in the layout panel. We are working on **developer documentation** that will be available on the book to make future contributions easier.

We would like to thank Outreachy for offering this internship.
